Splitting idempotents (#1105)
UniMath/agda-unimath: src/foundation/idempotent-maps.lagda.md

[invertible maps](foundation-core.invertible-maps.md) vs.
[coherently invertible maps](foundation-core.coherently-invertible-maps.md).
Recall that an _invertible map_ is a map `f : A → B` equipped with a converse
map `g : B → A` and homotopies `S : f ∘ g ~ id` and `R : g ∘ f ~ id` witnessing
that `g` is an _inverse_ of `f`, while a _coherently invertible map_ has an
additional coherence `f ·r R ~ S ·l f`.

It is true that every invertible map is coherently invertible, but no such
construction preserves both of the homotopies `S` and `R`. Likewise, every
quasicoherently idempotent map is also coherently idempotent, although again the
coherence `J` is replaced as part of this construction. On the other hand, in
contrast to invertible maps, not every idempotent map can be made to be fully
coherent or even quasicoherent. For a counterexample see Section 4 of
{{#cite Shu17}}.

**Terminology.** Our definition of an _idempotent map_ corresponds to the
definition of a _preidempotent map_ in {{#reference Shu17}} and
{{#reference Shu14SplittingIdempotents}}, while their definition of an
_idempotent map_ corresponds in our terminology to a _coherently idempotent

> map_.

Reviewer: Hm... I feel like we should consider following Shulman in his choice of terminology, but we can put that off until another pull request.

Author: I'd prefer to resolve terminology use issue before this PR is merged and I'm happy to implement any changes we conclude with. In fact, I originally formalized using Shulmans terminology, but then switched as it seems to conflict somewhat with the library's design choices. I've compared the term "idempotent" with "invertible" in the pull request message:

> Rename "preidempotent maps" to "idempotent maps". This mirrors how we treat "invertible maps" vs "coherently invertible maps", although there is an essential difference between the two concepts: idempotent maps are not "coherentifiable" like invertible maps. That role is taken by "quasicoherently idempotent maps" instead (which are called quasiidempotent maps in the paper)

Note, "quasiidempotence" isnt really about idempotence, just whether it is coherent in a good way or not.

Author: Another term we can compare with is perhaps "involution". We don't call them preinvolutions

Author: Let me know your thoughts! I am not as convinced about this change as my messages may sound

Author: > Another term we can compare with is perhaps "involution". We don't call them preinvolutions

Just to expand on this. A coherent involution would be an involution with the following coherence:

$$HH \sim fHf ∙ H$$
which is equivalent to having a coherence

$$Hf \sim fH$$

as given [at nLab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/involution#in_dependent_type_theory).

Reviewer: The question seems to be whether it should be a global design decision to make implementations of set-level concepts refer to their direct translation where set-level objects would be replaced by type-level objects, potentially resulting in an incoherent definition, or whether it should refer to a more complicated homotopically correct translation, which may be more difficult to come up with.

Generally, my first intuition tells me that we should make the homotopically correct translation the "main" implementation, but we should definitely allow for some exceptions. But that is not my conclusion :)

To me, the case of invertibility is an exception. I don't really love it that invertibility refers to the incoherent notion, but this is what the community calls it. Here we are just accommodating communication with the rest of the world. Another exception is the notion of injective map. For involutive operations we actually have both a coherent and an incoherent version, and the coherent version also uses the unmodified name "involutive".

These examples of invertibility and injectivity show that incoherent implementations of concepts are often quite useful and relevant concepts on their own. This makes me think that it should not be a global design decision that we should always try to do mathematics one particular way.

Note that examples where we have already decided to make coherent definitions the main definitions are also prominent in the library. H-spaces, unordered pairs, undirected graphs, involutive types, and many other definitions are all fully coherent. So I think we cannot make the decision one way or another by only talking about examples where one of the two approaches is taken. It should be noted, however, that in all of these examples we have convenient names for the fully coherent notion.

Coming to a conclusion, I think it is probably best to remain flexible about whether or not implementations of concepts should be fully coherent. I don't think it should be a global decision. With that conclusion I am quite happy if we leave your choice of terminology as it is, at least for now.

Reviewer: > > Another term we can compare with is perhaps "involution". We don't call them preinvolutions
> 
> Just to expand on this. A coherent involution would be an involution with homotopy H:f∘f∼id and the following coherence:
> 
> HH∼fHf∙H which is equivalent to having a coherence
> 
> Hf∼fH
> 
> as given [at nLab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/involution#in_dependent_type_theory).

See here for our existing work on involutions:

https://unimath.github.io/agda-unimath/structured-types.involutive-types.html

Author: > To me, the case of invertibility is an exception. I don't really love it that invertibility refers to the incoherent notion, but this is what the community calls it.

This is surprising to me. I thought the community usually called it "quasiivertibility" and that agda-unimath was taking a contrarian stance by calling it something else

Author: Alright, I guess I'm okay with leaving this discussion for the future, but let's perhaps consider fixing our crediting system before that time?

## Definitions

### The structure on a map of idempotence

```agda
is-idempotent : {l : Level} {A : UU l} → (A → A) → UU l
is-idempotent f = f ∘ f ~ f
```

### The type of idempotent maps on a type

```agda
idempotent-map : {l : Level} (A : UU l) → UU l
idempotent-map A = Σ (A → A) (is-idempotent)

module _
  {l : Level} {A : UU l} (f : idempotent-map A)
  where

  map-idempotent-map : A → A
  map-idempotent-map = pr1 f

  is-idempotent-idempotent-map :
    is-idempotent map-idempotent-map
  is-idempotent-idempotent-map = pr2 f
```

## Properties

> ### Being idempotent over a set is a property

Reviewer: I think you're mixing on and over sometimes

```suggestion
### Being an idempotent operation on a set is a property
```
